---
name: projects/constructive_disagreement/super_sabbatical/general_information.md
type: noResponse
---

# General Information

In the last several decades, the traditional lines between academic or “basic” research have blurred. With funding for interdisciplinary research, scholars have launched new fields of research and practice, think biotechnology, nanotechnology, data science, and machine learning. These fields thrive on links between universities and business by simultaneously attracting (1) scholars doing very basic research and (2) universities, corporations and nations keen to translate innovations in science and technology into advantages in reputation, business, and power.

This brings both challenge and opportunities for universities and researchers. On the challenge side of the ledger, the fixed costs of much research have risen considerably, and the competition for talent is making it harder and harder for universities to retain their leading researchers. This is especially difficult with the evolution of new forms of business organisation that are coming very close to offering leading researchers the best of both worlds: that is, the intellectual freedom of an academic career *and* the remuneration of being a significant participant in a commercially successful for-profit venture.

Therefore, universities are experimenting with new retention strategies based on creative incentives. Among these, there is the increasingly common practice of assisting researchers with the preparation and submission of patents around their research breakthroughs. Over time, this practice has grown in sophistication to focus not just on individual patents, but also on developing thematic collections of patents that could become valuable intellectual property (IP) portfolios. Even when universities hire outside experts or develop internal offices for building up their IP assets, creating a potentially valuable IP portfolio requires the research-minded faculty member to assist in tasks they generally find uninteresting. All too often, potentially valuable patents languish in large portfolios overseen by staff with more expertise in IP transactions than in the potential value of the patents and ideas themselves.

To get more out of IP portfolios and retain top faculty, some universities have begun to allow faculty to sell their individual interest in portfolios of patents arising from their research. The thinking is, faculty can identify who is knowledgeable enough about their area to have decent ideas about how to commercialise it, and they also have an interest in commercialisation. Allowing faculty to participate lowers the workload of technology transfer teams hired to facilitate commercialisation. Under these arrangements, faculty interested in monetizing are given an option to participate more directly.

But these experiments have their critics. Some view opportunities to participate in commercialising research as sullying the reputation of universities and scholars by shifting focus away from more basic research to research that is more “translational”. The worry is that leading thinkers will increasingly leave universities for elite research centres that offer idyllic settings for undisturbed thinking time and opportunities for free-wheeling interaction with inspiring colleagues. Even better, these centres require no teaching, no burdensome committee work, and no pressure to commercialise research.

When it comes to these things, your university has taken a middle road. Specifically, the university offers a framework under which faculty can sell their shares of patent portfolios based on their work, but the university reserves the right of first refusal in all such transactions. This allows the university to retain high-value portfolios so that the highest possible price can be secured should serious buyers come calling. To support this activity, the university has developed an investment-minded IP Committee of the Board of Trustees. Among other duties, members of this committee have been selected for their ability to weigh the seriousness of interest in IP portfolios when faculty come forward with a request for buyouts of their interest in a portfolio.

Another powerful faculty retention strategy is the traditional sabbatical, a 6-12-month leave from teaching and administration duties. Historically, sabbatical leaves were usually paid, albeit sometimes at a reduced salary. In recent years, fully paid sabbaticals have become less common, so faculty are increasingly accustomed to apply for fellowships to support their travel or other needs. For faculty with 8 or more years of service, however, the university policy is to provide full salary for up to a 6-month leave. For a full-year leave, faculty must either find a way to live on 6 months of pay or raise half a year’s salary (£10K per month for our star) through a fellowship. The purpose of sabbatical is to enhance faculty effectiveness in research and teaching and thereby increase their value to the University. Faculty must apply by outlining a specific plan of study or project they will undertake. Sabbaticals are then granted based upon the recommendation of the Chairman of a department and approval of the appropriate School Head, and the Provost. As a matter of fairness, reasonable plans are usually granted for qualifying faculty in good standing.

Using these retention tactics in combination presents both challenges and opportunities.

---